38/LOGOS-CONSENSUS-GLACIER (#512)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/38/README.md

---
slug: 38
title: 38/LOGOS-CONSENSUS
name: Initial Logos Consensus Description

> status: incomplete-pre-draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status: raw
```

Reviewer: I'd stick to making the status one of `raw`, `draft`, `stable`.
In this case `raw` is what this PR works towards.

> ---

Author: This a comment

suitable model of transaction.  

# Glacier 

The Glacier consensus algorithm computes a yes/no decision via a set
of distributed computational nodes.  Glacier is a leaderless
probabilistic binary consensus algorithm with fast finality that
provides good reliability for network and Byzantine fault tolerance.

## Algorithm 

Given a set of $n$ distributed computational nodes, a gossip-based
protocol is presumed to exist which which allows members to discover,
join, and leave a possibly maximally connected graph.  Joining this
graph allows each node to view a possibly incomplete node membership
list of all other nodes.  This view may change as the protocol
advances, as nodes join and leave.  

### Pre-requisites

A proposal is formulated to which consensus of truth or falsity is
desired.  Each node that participates starts the protocol with an
opinion on the proposal, represented in the sequel as **YES**, **NO**,
and **UNDECIDED**.

     opinon
        <-- choose local truth computation of  { YES, NO, UNDECIDED}
    
The algorithm proceeds in rounds for each node.  The liveness of the
algorithm is severely constrained in the absence of timeouts for a
round to proceed.

> ### Setup

Reviewer 2: I guess to name this section "Parameters" would more accurate. The total number of nodes N (or list of nodes)  is also needed for this algorithm to operate? Also I think that a parameter which tells the algorithm when to stop is missing  in this section.

Author: Changed to "Setup Parameters".  Distinguished between constants and variables in their use in the rounds.

The node initializes the following constants variables 

    ;;; The following values are constants chosen with justification from experiments
    ;;; performed with the adversarial models
    
    ;; FIXME: give an empiral confidence threshold 
    confidence_threshold
     <-- T  ;; BOGUS:  this should be a function of the network size
            ;; and the current confidence in the observer majority
    
    ;; constant look ahead parameter, 
    look_ahead 
      <-- 20
    
    ;; first order confidence smoothing parameter
    $alpha_1$ 
      <-- 0.8  ;; empirically derived from consensus simulation
    
    ;; second order confidence smoothing parameter
    $alpha_2$ 
      <-- 0.4  ;; empirically derived from consensus simulation
    
    ;;; The following variables are initialized
    
    ;; number of nodes to uniformly randomly query  
    k 
      <-- 7

    ;; neighbor threshold multiplier
    k_multiplier 
      <-- 2

    ;; maximal threshold multiplier, i.e. we will never exceed 

>     ;; questioning k_multiplier * max_k_multiplier peers

Author: err 

    k_multiplier ^ max_k_multiplier

    max_k_multiplier 
      <-- 4
      
    ;; total number of votes
    total_votes 
      <-- 0    

>     ;; total number of positive nodes

Reviewer 2: "total number of positive votes"?

    total_positive 
       <-- 0

###  Query 

A node selects $k$ nodes randomly from the locally known complete set
of peers in the network.

Each node replies with their current opinion on the proposal.

When the query finishes, the node now initializes the following two
values:

 

>     new_votes 

Reviewer 2: Is this just $k$ when all nodes are available?

Author: Not all votes are necessarily collected in a round (time outs).

Reviewer 2: Ok

>       <-- |vote replies received in this round|

Reviewer 2: "round" is equivalent to "query"?

Author: Yep.  Tried to make that more clear.

    positive_votes 
      <-- |YES votes received| 
    
### Computation    

The node runs the `new_votes` and `positive_votes` parameters received
in the query round through the following algorithm:

    total_votes 
      += new_votes
    total_positive 
      += positive_votes
    confidence 
      <-- total_votes / (total_votes + look_ahead) 

>     evidence_accumulated 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps  for  "evidence" we could use the same convention as for "votes", i.e. to use "total_evidence" instead of "evidence_accumulated"  and "new_evidence" for "evidence_round"?

      <-- total_positive / total_votes
    evidence_round 
      <-- positive_votes / new_votes
    evidence 
      <-- evidence_round * ( 1 - confidence ) + evidence_accumulated * confidence 
    alpha 
      <-- alpha_1 * ( 1 - confidence ) + alpha_2 * confidence 
    
### Opinion 

The node updates its local opinion on the consensus proposal:

    IF
      $evidence$ > $alpha$ 
    THEN ;; The node adopts the opinion YES on the proposal
      opinion <-- YES
    ELSE IF       
      $evidence$ < $1 - \alpha$ 
    THEN;; The node adopts the opinion NO on the proposal 
      opinion <-- NO
       
If the node is `UNDECIDED` after evaluating the opinion phase, the
number of uniform randomly queries nodes is adjusted to 
    
    IF
       node == UNDECIDED
    THEN 
       k   ;; number of nodes to uniformly randomly query in next round

>          <-- $k * \sup{ k_multiplier, max_k_multiplier}$

Author: This is bogus.

Author: should be 

    k *-- $sup{k * k_multiplier, k_multiplier * max_k_multiplier}

Author: I don't understand why I keep missing this.  *sigh*

---
slug: 38
title: 38/LOGOS-CONSENSUS
name: Logos Glacier Consensus Protocol
status: raw
category: informative
tags: logos/consensus,implementation/rust, implementation/python, implementation/common-lisp
editor: Mark Evenson <mark.evenson@status.im>
created: 01-JUL-2022
revised: <2022-08-10 Wed 10:15Z>
contributors:
    - Álvaro Castro-Castilla 
---

# Abstract

We propose to transition our use of resource intensive Nakomoto
consensus mechanisms to the class of more efficient, secure,
leaderless ones rooted in decentralization.  We sketch a simple
two-level model for the practical execution of such a fairly
distributed consensus mechanism, in which an underlying leaderless
binary decision mechanism is utilized to used to vote on the
construction of a distributed, directed, acyclic graph.  We present
the Glacier algorithm which provides a Byzantine fault tolerant
implementation of the base binary decision mechanism.  We outline a
taxonomy of Byzantine adversaries that seek to thwart this
computation's correct honesty.

> 

Reviewer 3: Requirements would fit nicely here

Reviewer 3: Ditto something like "prior work" or "motivation" (comparing e.g. BTC/ETH consensus briefly)

Author: I'll make a stab at further explaining the prior work of leaderless BFT binary consensus.

      <-- 2
    ;; maximal threshold multiplier, i.e. we will never exceed 
    ;; questioning k_multiplier * max_k_multiplier peers
    max_k_multiplier 
      <-- 4
      
The following variables will keep the state of Glacier:
      
    ;; total number of votes examined over all rounds
    total_votes 
      <-- 0 
    ;; total number of YES (i.e. positive) votes for the truth of the proposal
    total_positive 
      <-- 0
    ;; current number of nodes to attempt to query in a round
    k 
      <-- 7

###  Query 

A node selects $k$ nodes randomly from the current locally known
complete set of peers in the network.  

A query is sent to each neighbor with the node's current `opinion` of
the proposal.

Each node replies with their current opinion on the proposal.

When the query finishes, the node now initializes the following two
values:

    new_votes 
      <-- |total vote replies received in this round to the current query|
    positive_votes 
      <-- |YES votes received from the query| 
    
### Computation    

The node runs the `new_votes` and `positive_votes` parameters received
in the query round through the following algorithm:

    total_votes 

>       += new_votes

Author: TODO Change to from `+=` to `+==` normalizing to three characters like all other "line join" operators.

    total_positive 
      += positive_votes
    confidence 
      <-- total_votes / (total_votes + look_ahead) 
    total_evidence 
      <-- total_positive / total_votes
    new_evidence 
      <-- positive_votes / new_votes
    evidence 
      <-- new_evidence * ( 1 - confidence ) + total_evidence * confidence 
    alpha 
      <-- doubt * ( 1 - confidence ) + certainty * confidence 
    
### Opinion 

The node updates its local opinion on the consensus proposal:

    IF

>       $evidence$ > $alpha$ 

Author: Remove LaTex prefixes here.  Include only in appendices until we debug the presentation run.

assigned for each node consisting of a real number on the interval $[0, 1]$.
This weight is used in each query round when selecting the $k$
peers so the probability of selecting nodes is proportional to their
weight.

$$
P(i) = \frac{w_i}{\sum_{j=0}^{j=N} w_j}
$$ 

where $w_i$ is the weight of the {i}th peer.

This weighted value would be used to reflect decisions mediating

- Staking
- Heuristic reputation
- Manual reputation

### Problems 

If the view of other nodes is incomplete, then the sum of the optional
weighting won't be a probability distribution normalized to 1.

The current algorithm doesn't describe how the initial opinions are formed.

# Implementation status

logos.co is prepared to share an implementations in Rust which
contains an efficiently multi-threaded implementation utilized by both
a local simulator and actual network construction.  Expressions of
Glacier in Python and Common Lisp are also in limited public review.

# Interoperability

There is no current wire protocol for the queries.  Nodes are advised
to use Waku messages to include their own metadata in serializations
as needed.  Such a message contains minimally

>     round ;; the local number of rounds participating 

Author: Write out as N3 Bags for semantics.

---
slug: 38
title: 38/LOGOS-CONSENSUS
name: Logos Glacier Consensus Protocol
status: raw
category: informative
tags: logos/consensus,implementation/rust, implementation/python, implementation/common-lisp
editor: Mark Evenson <mark.evenson@status.im>
created: 01-JUL-2022
revised: <2022-08-10 Wed 10:15Z>
contributors:
    - Álvaro Castro-Castilla 
---

# Abstract

We propose to transition our use of resource intensive Nakomoto
consensus mechanisms to the class of more efficient, secure,

> leaderless ones rooted in decentralization.  We sketch a simple

Reviewer 4: semantic break line is encouraged: https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/1/#conventions

    total_positive 
      += positive_votes
    confidence 
      <-- total_votes / (total_votes + look_ahead) 
    total_evidence 
      <-- total_positive / total_votes
    new_evidence 
      <-- positive_votes / new_votes
    evidence 
      <-- new_evidence * ( 1 - confidence ) + total_evidence * confidence 
    alpha 
      <-- doubt * ( 1 - confidence ) + certainty * confidence 
    
### Opinion 

The node updates its local opinion on the consensus proposal by
examining the relationship between the evidence accumulated for a
proposal with the confidence encoded in the `alpha` parameter:

    IF
      evidence > alpha
    THEN ;; The node adopts the opinion YES on the proposal
      opinion <-- YES
    ELSE IF       
      evidence < 1 - alpha
    THEN;; The node adopts the opinion NO on the proposal 
      opinion <-- NO
       
If the opinion of the node is `UNDECIDED` after evaluating the opinion
phase, the number of uniform randomly queries nodes is adjusted by
multiplying the neighbors `k` by the `k_multiplier` up to the limit
of `k_max_multiplier` query size increases.
    
    ;; possibly increase number nodes to uniformly randomly query in next round
    WHEN

>        opinion == UNDECIDED

Reviewer 5: This may be confusing, we should not mix `opinion` and `decision`:
* Opinion: yes, no, none
* Decision: Variable(`undecided`)/invariable(`decided`)  node state

Author: Changed UNDECIDED opinion to NONE

    AND 
       k < k_original * k_multiplier ^ max_k_multiplier
    THEN 
       k <-- k * k_multiplier

###  Decision 

After the OPINION phase is executed, the current value of `confidence`
is considered: if `confidence` exceeds a threshold derived from the
network size and directly related to the total votes received, an
honest node marks the decision as final, and always returns this
opinion is response to further queries from other nodes on the
network.
 
    IF 
      confidence > confidence_threshold
    OR 
      round > max_rounds
    THEN

>       finalized <-- T

Reviewer 5: This finalized flag could be the `decision` itself.

Author: Hmm, I haven't specified the Termination Conditions.  I was in the middle of refactoring it out in a section to describe modeling/running in async/sync modes.  I'll TODO RSN.

it initiates a new query.

## Termination Conditions

The alogrithim

## Further points

### Node receives information when answering queries

In the query step, the node is envisioned as packing information into
the query to cut down on the communication overhead a query to each of
this $k$ nodes containing the node's own current opinion on the
proposal ("YES", "NO", or "UNDECIDED").  The relation of the metadata
is not currently analyzed to these opinions should be constrained.

### Weighted Node values

The view of network peers participants may optionally have a weighting
assigned for each node consisting of a real number on the interval $[0, 1]$.
This weight is used in each query round when selecting the $k$
peers so the probability of selecting nodes is proportional to their
weight.

$$
P(i) = \frac{w_i}{\sum_{j=0}^{j=N} w_j}
$$ 

where $w_i$ is the weight of the {i}th peer.

This weighted value would be used to reflect decisions mediating

- Staking
- Heuristic reputation
- Manual reputation

### Problems 

If the view of other nodes is incomplete, then the sum of the optional
weighting won't be a probability distribution normalized to 1.

> The current algorithm doesn't describe how the initial opinions are formed.

Reviewer 5: By default an honest node would vote `yes` for anything that is not in conflict with previous voted things (and finalised ones). Otherwise is up the heuristics of resolving conflicts. But, for a happy path, every honest nodes always votes on `yes`.

proposal.  The resulting impact on the privacy of the node's opinion
is not currently analyzed.

## Security with respect to various Adversarial Models 

Adversarial models have been tested for which the values for current
parameters of Glacier have been tuned.  Exposition of the
justification of this tuning need to be completed.

### Local Strategies

#### Random Adversary

A random adversary optionally chooses to respond to all queries with a
random decision.  Note that this adversary may be in some sense
Byzantine but not malicious.  The random adversary also models some
software defects involved in not "understanding" how to derive a truth
value for a given proposition.

#### Infantile Adversary

Like a petulant child, an infantile adversary responds with the
opposite vote of the honest majority on an opinion.

### Omniscient Coordinated Behavior Adversaries

An omniscient adversary controls $f$ of $N$ nodes and may inspect,
delay, and drop arbitrary messages in the gossip layer, and utilize
this to corrupt consensus away from honest decisions to ones favorable
to itself.  It may, of course, choose to participate in an honest

> manner until defecting is most advantageous.

Reviewer 5: One thing missing here is that we consider the Omniscient adversary to be fully aware at all times of the network state. Meaning that he can always chose to vote in the most efficient way to block the network from reaching finality.

Author: TODO Need to start dividing the Omniscient Adversary along complexity classes and coordination power.

---
slug: 38
title: 38/LOGOS-CONSENSUS-GLACIER
name: Logos Glacier Consensus Protocol
status: raw
category: informative
tags: logos/consensus,implementation/rust, implementation/python, implementation/common-lisp
editor: Mark Evenson <mark.evenson@status.im>
created: 01-JUL-2022
revised: <2022-08-18 Thu 13:55Z>
contributors:
    - Álvaro Castro-Castilla 
---

# Abstract

> 

Reviewer: As this is an RFC, I'd start with (copied from the notion document; changed "describes -> specifies"):

------

This document specifies the Glacier Binary Byzantine Agreement algorithm, and its extension to a DAG structure in order to achieve a leaderless byzantine-resistant algorithm for consensus, of application in the context of permission-less blockchains.

------

It should be very clear, what this document actually specifies.

Author: The "and its extension to a DAG structure" part should be elided, as we are not even attempting to specify how to use Glacier.

We propose to transition our use of resource intensive Nakomoto
consensus mechanisms to the class of more efficient and leaderless
ones rooted in decentralization which provide an exact probabilistic
measure of safety.  We sketch a simple two-level model for the
practical execution of such a fairly distributed consensus mechanism,
in which an underlying leaderless binary decision mechanism is
utilized to used to vote on the construction of a distributed,
directed, acyclic graph.  We present the Glacier algorithm which
provides a Byzantine fault tolerant implementation of the base binary
decision mechanism.  We outline a taxonomy of Byzantine adversaries
that seek to thwart this computation's correct honesty.

# Consensus Model

> 

Reviewer: Imo, an introductory sentence would help making the following paragraph easier to digest.
Something like: "The consensus model specified in this document is based on the fact that given an underlying [...]"

Reviewer 6: agreed, and this justification can come from Alvaro's original document in Notion. It specifically describes what the algorithm aims to improve over current Snow protocols.

Given an underlying binary consensus mechanism, one may quickly vote
on the distributed, directed acyclic ledger graph of transactions.  If
the underlying binary consensus mechanism is Byzantine fault tolerant,
then one essentially gets the computation of the trust of the graph of
transactions "for free".  The finalization of shared confidence in the
values in a given sequence along this graph is isomorphic to the trace
of a shared, trusted state machine evolution.  Such a state machine
may perform an arbitrary computation from the class of "smart
contract" artifacts by implementing a given model of transaction.

# Glacier 

> 

Reviewer: I'd mention that `Glacier` is the algorithm that is specified in this document.

In the future, it might make sense to actually introduce/propose the algorithm in a scientic paper,
and then write here: "... This document speciefies the (integration / usage of) Glacier, proposed in [?], in the context of logos..."

The Glacier consensus algorithm computes a yes/no decision on a
proposition via a set of distributed computational nodes.  Glacier is
a leaderless probabilistic binary consensus algorithm with fast
finality that provides good reliability for network and Byzantine
fault tolerance.

## Algorithm 

The algorithm begins with considering the truth status of a given
proposition.

A proposal is formulated to which consensus of truth or falsity is
desired.  Each node that participates starts the protocol with an
opinion on the proposal, represented in the sequel as `yes`, `no`,
and `none`.

A new proposition is discovered either by local creation or in
response to a query, a node checks its local opinion.  If the node can
compute a justification of the proposal, it sets its opinion to one of
`yes` or `no`.  If it cannot form an opinion, it leaves its opinion as
`none`.

The node then participates in a number of query rounds in which it
solicits other node's opinion in query rounds.  Given a set of $n$
leaderless computational nodes, a gossip-based protocol is presumed to

> exist which which allows members to discover, join, and leave a weakly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exist which allows members to discover, join, and leave a weakly
```

> transitory maximally connected graph.  Joining this graph allows each

Reviewer: Does "weakly transitory" mean the algorithm assumes a low churn rate?

Author: I was more envisioning considering a dynamically varying churn, at different timescales.  Nodes enter and leave as the protocol rounds progress.

Reviewer: I'd make that explicit.

> node to view a possibly incomplete node membership list of all other

Reviewer: Assuming the graph is maximally connected, why is the node list "possibly incomplete".
Is that due to chrun? Byzantine faults (due to connectivity problems / deliberate attacks)? I'd explicitly state that.

Author: > why is the node list "possibly incomplete".
>Is that due to chrun? [sic]

Yes, faults both Byzantine and otherwise (hardware/software/network).

Reviewer: I'd explicitly state this as the reason why we might not see the whole memeber list even though we have a full graph.

---
slug: 38
title: 38/LOGOS-CONSENSUS
name: Initial Logos Consensus Description
status: raw
tags: logos
editor: Mark Evenson <mark.evenson@status.im>
contributors:
- Mark Evenson <mark.evenson@status.im>
---
# Problematic

      If the doors of perception were cleansed every thing would appear to
      man as it is: Infinite. For man has closed himself up, till he sees
      all things thro' narrow chinks of his cavern.
          -- William Blake "The Marriage of Heaven and Hell"
          
      To await and prepare for this moment is to manipulate
      information not as the last shock wave whose significance
      escapes everyone, but as the first repercussion of an act still
      to come.
          -- Raoul Vaneigm "Basic Banalities"
      

## In Media Res

We begin--as all worthwhile journeys begin--in the middle of things,

> desiring to communciate a whole without knowing the exact shape of the

Reviewer 7: communicate*

The use of semantic line breaks https://sembr.org/ is recommended https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/1/#conventions

Author: > The use of semantic line breaks https://sembr.org/ is recommended https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/1/#conventions

Choosing to not implement this suggestion for the moment, as manual paragraph filling is part of my re-writing process. 

  - [ ] But I'll definitely take this as a TODO for exiting the RAW specification state to not confuse upstream consumers.

Author: It doesn't seem that the inclusion of line breaks is affecting downstream Markdown consumer's notion of paragraphs.  

But will double check before we enter ~~draft~~ raw.

future we have glimpsed in moments of revelation, which while
untethered from currently existing reality, provides an intoxicating
fever dream of a more desirable future.

And the dream is this: one can do blockchain without Nakamoto
consensus.  One can have a leaderless consensus, upon which a
totalizing view of transactions can be constructed.

# Consensus
# Interoperability 
## Wire Formats Specification / Syntax

> At this point, we do not commit to a syntax but rather to a semantics

Reviewer: I'd open a new section (above this one) for the semantics. 

Somboday who just wants to implement, and already has an understanding of how things work, can jump to the sytax section for reference and start implementing.

Author: Hmm.  The subtlety is there isn't a wire protocol defined yet, just a semantics of what meanings nodes exchange for consensus rounds.  I was thinking about deriving an interoperable JSON syntax from an abstract semantics, hence this approach.  

I understand and accept your emphasis on ease of implementation here, so will reconsider my approach when I finish getting my PR draft for today ready to push.

Reviewer: Wdyt @oskarth @corpetty? Is there any raw material a wire format spec (e.g. protobuf) could be based on?
In case we don't have this, i'd suggest starting with the semantics section and leave the background/intro/motivation for last.
Imo, starting with the semantics section is perfectly fine, too.
Mainly, my point was to put the semantics in a separate section like so:

```

## Theory / Semantics

<If there is no sufficient material to start with a raw wire spec, start here>

## Wire Formats Specification / Syntax

At this point, we do not commit to a syntax but rather to a semantics [...]

```

Author: The Theory section has been moved to appendices, being replaced with a complete pseudo-code transcription of Glacier.

For wire formats, users are advised to construct a suitable Waku payload with appropiate metada probaly via JSON, preferrably via JSON-LD.

opposite vote of the honest majority on an opinion.

### Omniscient Adversaries

Omniscient adversaries have somhow gained an "unfair" participation in
consensus by being able to controlling `f` of `N` nodes with an
out-of-band "supra-liminal" communication mechansim.  Such adversaries
may use this coordinated behavior to delay or sway honest majority
consensus.

#### Passive Gossip Adversary

The passive network omniscient adversary is fully aware at all times
of the network state. Such an adversary can always chose to vote in
the most efficient way to block the distributed consenus from
finalizing.

#### Active Gossip Adversary

An omniscient gossip adversary somehow not only controls `f` of `N`
nodes, but has also has corrupted communications between nodes such
that she may inspect, delay, and drop arbitrary messages.  She uses
this to corrupt consensus away from honest decisions to ones favorable
to itself.  She may, of course, choose to participate in an honest
manner until defecting is most advantageous.

# Future Directions

Although we have proposed a normative description of the
implementation of the underlying binary consensus algorithm (Glacier),

> we believe we have analyzed its adversarial performance in a manner

Author: "we believe we have prepared for analysis"

that is ammendable to replacement by another member of the [snow*][]
family.

We have presumed the existence of a general family of algorithms that
can be counted on to vote on nodes in the DAG in a fair manner.
Avalanche provides an example of the construction of votes on UTXO
transactions.  One can express all state machine, i.e. account-based
models as checkpoints anchored in UTXO trust, so we believe that this
presupposition has some justification.  We can envision a need for
tooling abstraction that allow one to just program the DAG itself, as
they should be of stable interest no matter if Glacier isn't. 

# Informative References

0. [Logos](https://logos.co/)

1. [On BFT Consensus Evolution: From Monolithic to
   DAG](https://dahliamalkhi.github.io/posts/2022/06/dag-bft/)

> 2. [snow-ipfs](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmUy4jh5mGNZvLkjies1RWM4YuvJh5o2FYopNPVYwrRVGV)

Author: Add ipfs URI.

---
slug: 38
title: 38/CONSENSUS-CLARO
name: Claro Consensus Protocol
status: raw
category: Standards Track
tags: logos/consensus
editor: Corey Petty <corey@status.im>
created: 01-JUL-2022
revised: <2022-08-26 Fri 13:11Z>
uri: <https://rdf.logos.co/protocol/Claro/1/0/0#<2022-08-26%20Fri$2013:11Z>
contributors:
    - Álvaro Castro-Castilla 
    - Mark Evenson

>     - Corey Petty

Reviewer: You could remove yourself as a contributor, now that you are the editor.

The concept of the Snowball algorithm is relatively simple. Following is a simplified description (lacking some details, but giving an overview). For further details, please refer to the [Avalanche paper](https://assets.website-files.com/5d80307810123f5ffbb34d6e/6009805681b416f34dcae012_Avalanche%20Consensus%20Whitepaper.pdf).

1. The objective is to vote yes/no on a decision (this decision could be a single bit, or, in our DAG use case, whether a vertex should be included or not).
2. Every node has an eventually-consistent complete view of the network. It will select at random k nodes, and will ask their opinion on the decision (yes/no).
3. After this sampling is finished, if there is a vote that has more than an `alpha` threshold, it accumulates one count for this opinion, as well as changes its opinion to this one. But, if a different opinion is received, the counter is reset to 1. If no threshold `alpha` is reached, the counter is reset to 0 instead.
4. After several iterations of this algorithm, we will reach a threshold `beta`, and decide on that as final.

> Next, we will proceed to describe our new algorithm, based on Snowball. There are 3 main paths to achieving the initial target of improving the current state of the art:

Reviewer: When introducing ways of improving, I'd expect reasons why it is desirable to improve Snowball in the first place.

Reviewer 6: will include in a separate PR.

- Find ways to extend the Snowball algorithm.
- Find ways to modify the Snowball algorithm.
- Find ways to strengthen the Snowball algorithm in particular scenarios, or as generic as possible.

> 

Reviewer: Imo, these are a bit vague.
How is strengthening different from modifying?

Reviewer 6: deleted "modify" and just use strengthen for now

In our design, all 3 are attempted.

> We have identified a shortcoming of the Snowball algorithm that was a perfect starting point for devising improvements. The scenario is as follows:

Reviewer: I'd remove the text from 

> There are 3 main paths to achieving the initial target  [...]

up to here and just list:

> We have identified a shortcoming of the Snowball algorithm 

as a motivation.

Imo, having discovered a shortcoming and providing a solution is a strong motivation.
Starting with this as motivation also clearly says why it is desirable to do this.

I'd put the more general motivation into a scientific paper and explain

* why it is desirable/necessary to improve Snowflake
* why it makes sense to improve Snowflake and not design something new.

Without answers to these question, and the phrase

>  that was a perfect starting point for devising improvements

the motivation (to me) reads a bit like "searching for a problem in order to do be able to do research",
instead of solving an actual or expected problem that has impact in practice.
Imo, while the former is good to push the boundaries of theoretical research,
the latter is a stronger motivation for applied research resulting in a spec.

(Feel free to ignore this; just my thoughts while reading.)

- This adversary follows a strategy that allows them to rapidly change the decision bit (possibly even in a coordinated way) so as to maximally confuse the honest nodes.
- Under normal conditions, honest nodes will accumulate supermajorities soon enough, and reach the `beta` threshold. However, when an honest node performs a query and does not reach the threshold `alpha` of responses, the counter will be set to 0.
- The highest threat to Snowball is an adversary that keeps it from reaching the `beta` threshold, managing to continuously reset the counter, and steering Snowball away from making a decision.

This document only outlines the specification to Claro. Subsequent analysis work on Claro (both on its performance and how it differentiates with Snowball) will be published shortly and this document will be updated. 

# Claro Algorithm Specification

The Claro consensus algorithm computes a boolean decision on a
proposition via a set of distributed computational nodes.  Claro is
a leaderless, probabilistic, binary consensus algorithm with fast
finality that provides good reliability for network and Byzantine
fault tolerance.

## Algorithmic concept

> Claro is an evolution of the Snowball BBA algorithm, in which we tackle specifically the perceived weakness described above. The main focus is going to be the counter and the triggering of the reset. Following, we elaborate the different modifications and features that have been added to the reference algorithm:

Reviewer: What does BBA stand for?

Reviewer 6: fixed

1. Instead of allowing the latest evidence to change the opinion completely, we take into account all accumulated evidence, to reduce the impact of high variability when there is already a large amount of evidence collected.
2. Eliminate the counter and threshold scheme, and introduce instead two regimes of operation:
    - One focused on grabbing opinions and reacting as soon as possible. This part is somewhat closer conceptually to the reference algorithm.
    - Another one focused on interpreting the accumulated data instead of reacting to the latest information gathered.
3. Finally, combine those two phases via a transition function. This avoids the creation of a step function, or a sudden change in behavior that could complicate analysis and understanding of the dynamics. Instead, we can have a single algorithm that transfers weight from one operation to the other as more evidence is gathered.
4. Additionally, we introduce a function for weighted sampling. This will allow the combination of different forms of weighting:
    - Staking
    - Heuristic reputation

>     - Manual reputation.

Reviewer: Links to these weighting methods would be helpful.

Reviewer 6: We don't have any, they're just options that could be used to inform weight.

It’s worth delving a bit into the way the data is interpreted in order to reach a decision. Our approach is based conceptually on the paper [Confidence as Higher-Order Uncertainty](https://cis.temple.edu/~pwang/Publication/confidence.pdf), which describes a frequentist approach to decision certainty. The first-order certainty, measured by frequency, is caused by known positive evidence, and the higher-order certainty is caused by potential positive evidence. Because confidence is a relative measurement defined on evidence, it naturally follows comparing the amount of evidence the system knows with the amount that it will know in the near future (defining “near” as a constant). 

> Intuitively, we are looking for a function of **`w`**, call it **`c`** for confidence, that satisfies the following conditions:

Reviewer: `w` has not been introduced yet.
Maybe just: "of evidence **`w`**"

1. Confidence `c` is a continuous and monotonically increasing function of `w`. (More evidence, higher confidence.)
2. When `w = 0`, `c = 0`. (Without any evidence, confidence is minimum.)
3. When `w` goes to infinity, `c` converges to 1. (With infinite evidence, confidence is maximum.)

The paper describes also a set of operations for the evidence/confidence pairs, so that different sources of knowledge could be combined. However, we leave here the suggestion of a possible research line in the future combining an algebra of evidence/confidence pairs with swarm-propagation algorithm like the one described in [this paper](http://replicated.cc/files/schmebulock.pdf).

### Initial opinion
A proposal is formulated to which consensus of truth or falsity is
desired.  Each node that participates starts the protocol with an
opinion on the proposal, represented in the sequel as `NO`, `NONE`,
and `YES`.

A new proposition is discovered either by local creation or in
response to a query, a node checks its local opinion.  If the node can
compute a justification of the proposal, it sets its opinion to one of
`YES` or `NO`.  If it cannot form an opinion, it leaves its opinion as
`NONE`.

> For now, we will ignore the proposal dessimination process and assume all nodes participating have an initial opinion to repond to within a given request. Further research will relax this assumption and analyze timing attacks on proposal propagation through the network. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For now, we will ignore the proposal dissemination process and assume all nodes participating have an initial opinion to respond to within a given request. Further research will relax this assumption and analyze timing attacks on proposal propagation through the network. 
```

severely constrained in the absence of timeouts for a round to
proceed.  When a given node has finalized its decision on the
proposal, it enters a quiescent state in which it optionally discards
all information gathered during the query process retaining only the
final opinion on the truth of the proposal. -->

### Setup Parameters

The node initializes the following integer ratios as constants:
```
# The following values are constants chosen with justification from experiments
# performed with the adversarial models

# 
confidence_threshold
  <-- 1   
         
# constant look ahead for number of rounds we expect to finalize a
# decision.  Could be set dependent on number of nodes 
# visible in the current gossip graph.
look_ahead 
  <-- 19

# the confidence weighting parameter (aka alpha_1)
certainty 
  <-- 4 / 5  
doubt ;; the lack of confidence weighting parameter (aka alpha_2)
  <-- 2 / 5 

k_multiplier     ;; neighbor threshold multiplier
  <-- 2

;;; maximal threshold multiplier, i.e. we will never exceed 
;;; questioning k_initial * k_multiplier ^ max_k_multiplier_power peers
max_k_multiplier_power 
  <-- 4
    

> ;;; Initial numbers of nodes queried in a round

Reviewer: ```suggestion
;;; Initial number of nodes queried in a round
```

k_initial 
  <-- 7

;;; maximum query rounds before termination
max_rounds

>    <-- 997 ;; TODO justify

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure this is ok. In experimentations we considered a round **failed** if didn't reached consensus before round `100`.

Reviewer 6: added note, can change later with some justification.

```
      
The following variables are needed to keep the state of Claro:

```
;; current number of nodes to attempt to query in a round
k 
  <-- k_original
  
;; total number of votes examined over all rounds
total_votes 
   <-- 0 
;; total number of YES (i.e. positive) votes for the truth of the proposal
total_positive 
   <-- 0
;; the current query round, an integer starting from zero
round
  <-- 0
```

###  Phase One: Query 

A node selects `k` nodes randomly from the complete pool of peers in the
network. This query is can optionally be weighted, so the probability
of selecting nodes is proportional to their 

Node Weighting
$$ 
P(i) = \frac{w_i}{\sum_{j=0}^{j=N} w_j} 
$$

> 

Reviewer: Maybe it would help to mention again that $w$ is the evidence.

The list of nodes is maintained by a separate protocol (the network
layer), and eventual consistency of this knowledge in the network
suffices. Even if there are slight divergences in the network view
from different nodes, the algorithm is resilient to those.

A query is sent to each neighbor with the node's current `opinion` of
the proposal.

Each node replies with their current opinion on the proposal.

See [the wire protocol Interoperability section](#wire-protocol) for
details on the semantics and syntax of the "on the wire"
representation of this query.

**Adaptive querying**. An additional optimization in the query
consists of adaptively growing the *`k`* constant in the event of
**high confusion**. We define high confusion as the situation in
which neither opinion is strongly held in a query (*i.e.* a
threshold is not reached for either yes or no). For this, we will
use the *`alpha`* threshold defined below. This adaptive growth of
the query size is done as follows:

Every time the threshold is not reached, we multiply *`k`* by a
constant. In our experiments, we found that a constant of 2 works

> well, but what really matter is that it stays within that order of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
well, but what really matters is that it stays within that order of
```

    positive_votes 
      <-- |YES votes received from the query| 
    
### Phase Two: Computation
When the query returns, three ratios are used later on to compute the
transition function and the opinion forming. Confidence encapsulates
the notion of how much we know (as a node) in relation to how much we
will know in the near future (this being encoded in the look-ahead
parameter *`l`*.) Evidence accumulated keeps the ratio of total positive
votes vs the total votes received (positive and negative), whereas the
evidence per round stores the ratio of the current round only.

Parameters
$$
\begin{array}{lc}
\text{Look-ahead parameter}      & l = 20 \newline
\text{First evidence parameter}  & \alpha_1 = 0.8 \newline
\text{Second evidence parameter} & \alpha_2 = 0.5 \newline
\end{array}
$$

Computation
$$
\begin{array}{lc}
\text{Confidence}                & c_{accum} \impliedby \frac{total\ votes}{total\ votes + l} \newline
\text{Total accumulated evidence}& e_{accum} \impliedby \frac{total\ positive\ votes}{total\ votes} \newline
\text{Evidence per round}        & e_{round} \impliedby \frac{round\ positive\ votes}{round\ votes} \newline
\end{array}
$$

> 

Reviewer: This LaTex block and the following algo have overlapping definitions (with different naming), e.g.
`e_{accum}`  and `total_evidence`
I'd just define these once.

Reviewer: Reading further and tracking back, I see: The transition function below also matches the `total_evidence` and `new_evidence`.

Imo, specifying/introducing this as a transition function and two regimes makes this more complicated to understand.
I'd specify this using the following algorithm and then explain that this can be interpreted or seen as a transition function doing smooth transitions between two regimes.
I'd also explicitly mention that this means, these regimes are both active at the same time (kind of blend together),
with the transition making the influence of the one stronger and the other weaker. 
(If I understood this correctly.)

Reviewer 6: I'm going to leave this alone for right now, and improve in a future PR after a discussion with you and the team.

The node runs the `new_votes` and `positive_votes` parameters received
in the query round through the following algorithm:

    total_votes 
      +== new_votes
    total_positive 
      +== positive_votes
    confidence 
      <-- total_votes / (total_votes + look_ahead) 
    total_evidence 
      <-- total_positive / total_votes
    new_evidence 
      <-- positive_votes / new_votes
    evidence 
      <-- new_evidence * ( 1 - confidence ) + total_evidence * confidence 
    alpha 
      <-- doubt * ( 1 - confidence ) + certainty * confidence 
    

> ### Phase Three: Computation

Reviewer: Should this be "Transition Function", in line with the list above?

In order to eliminate the need for a step function (a conditional in
the code), we introduce a transition function from one regime to the
other. Our interest in removing the step function is twofold:

> 

Reviewer: Imo, it would help to explain these regimes here. They were abstractly desribed in the background section, but it is not quite clear what they comprise exactly. If I understand correctly, they are governed by `alpha (accumulated confidence)` and `evidence`, respectively.

Reviewer 6: I agree, but will leave that to a future PR after some team discussion on how best to describe this transition.

1. Simplify the algorithm. With this change the number of branches is
   reduced, and everything is expressed as a set of equations.

2. The transition function makes the regime switch smooth,
   making it harder to potentially exploit the sudden regime change in
   some unforeseen manner. Such a swift change in operation mode could
   potentially result in a more complex behavior than initially
   understood, opening the door to elaborated attacks. The transition
   function proposed is linear with respect to the confidence.

Transition Function
$$
\begin{array}{cl}
evidence & \impliedby e_{round} (1 - c_{accum}) + e_{accum} c_{accum} \newline
\alpha &  \impliedby \alpha_1 (1 - c_{accum}) + \alpha_2 c_{accum} \newline
\end{array} 
$$

>     

Reviewer: Imo, $\alpha_1$ and $\alpha_2$ are confusing names here, because they are chosen weight parameters and not derived from $\alpha$

Reviewer 6: agreed, will rethink them.

on the current opinion. For that, a confidence threshold is
employed. This threshold is derived from the network size, and is
directly related to the number of total votes received.
  
Decision
$$
\begin{array}{cl}
evidence > \alpha & \implies \text{opinion YES} \newline
evidence < 1 - \alpha & \implies \text{opinion NO} \newline
if\ \text{confidence} > c_{target} & THEN \ \text{finalize decision} \newline
\end{array}
$$

After the `OPINION` phase is executed, the current value of `confidence`
is considered: if `confidence` exceeds a threshold derived from the
network size and directly related to the total votes received, an
honest node marks the decision as final, and always returns this
opinion is response to further queries from other nodes on the
network.
 
    IF 
      confidence > confidence_threshold
    OR 
      round > max_rounds
    THEN
      finalized <-- T
      QUERY LOOP TERMINATES
    ELSE 
      round +== 1
      QUERY LOOP CONTINUES

Thus, after the decision phase, either a decision has been finalized
and the local node becomes quiescent never initiating a new query, or
it initiates a [new query](#query).

### Termination

> A local round of Claro terminates in one of the following following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A local round of Claro terminates in one of the following
```

coordinated an absolute time with their peers.  For an implementation
of a phase locked-loop feedback to measure local clock drift see
[NTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5905.html).

## Further points

### Node receives information during round
In the query step, the node is envisioned as packing information into
the query to cut down on the communication overhead a query to each of
this `k` nodes containing the node's own current opinion on the
proposal (`YES`, `NO`, or `NONE`).  The algorithm does not currently
specify how a given node utilizes this incoming information.  A
possible use may be to count unsolicited votes towards a currently
active round, and discard the information if the node is in a
quiescent state.

#### Problems with Weighting Node Value of Opinions
If the view of other nodes is incomplete, then the sum of the optional
weighting will not be a probability distribution normalized to 1.

The current algorithm doesn't describe how the initial opinions are formed.

# Implementation status
The following implementations have been created for various testing and simulation purposes:
- [Rust](https://github.com/logos-co/consensus-research)

> - [Python]() - FILL THIS IN WITH NEWLY CREATED REPO

Reviewer: Is there any update?

> - [Python]() - FILL THIS IN WITH NEWLY CREATED REPO

Reviewer 5: should we just publish the `consensus-models` which is currently private?

Reviewer 6: you mentioned you wanted to publish each implementation into a separate repo. I'd say each implementation should be able to be used as a library to other people and not clumped together.

that she may inspect, delay, and drop arbitrary messages.  Such an
adversary uses capability to corrupt consensus away from honest
decisions to ones favorable to itself.  This adversary will, of
course, choose to participate in an honest manner until defecting is
most advantageous.

# Future Directions

Although we have proposed a normative description of the
implementation of the underlying binary consensus algorithm (Claro),
we believe we have prepared for analysis its adversarial performance
in a manner that is amenable to replacement by another member of the
[snow*](#snow*) family.

We have presumed the existence of a general family of algorithms that
can be counted on to vote on nodes in the DAG in a fair manner.
Avalanche provides an example of the construction of votes on UTXO
transactions.  One can express all state machine, i.e. account-based
models as checkpoints anchored in UTXO trust, so we believe that this
presupposition has some justification.  We can envision a need for
tooling abstraction that allow one to just program the DAG itself, as
they should be of stable interest no matter if Claro isn't. 

> # Colophon

Reviewer: Imo, we don't need that section.

# Informative References

0. [Logos](<https://logos.co/>)

1. [On BFT Consensus Evolution: From Monolithic to
   DAG](<https://dahliamalkhi.github.io/posts/2022/06/dag-bft/>)

2. [snow-ipfs](<https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmUy4jh5mGNZvLkjies1RWM4YuvJh5o2FYopNPVYwrRVGV>)

3. [snow*](<https://www.avalabs.org/whitepapers>) The Snow family of
   algorithms
   
4. [Move](<https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/how-to/using/writing-dags>)
    Move: a Language for Writing DAG Abstractions 

5. [rdf](<http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>)

6. [rdfs](<http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>)

7. [xsd](<http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#>) 

8. [n3-w3c-notes](<https://www.w3.org/TeamSubmission/n3/>)

9. [ntp](<https://www.ntp.org/downloads.html>)

## Normative References

0. [Claro](<https://rdf.logos.co/protocol/Claro/1/0/0/raw>)

1. [n3](<https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Notation3.html>)

2. [json-ld](<https://json-ld.org/>)

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via
[CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

> ## Format

Reviewer: I'd remove that section.

---
slug: 38
title: 38/LOGOS-CONSENSUS-GLACIER
name: Logos Glacier Consensus Protocol
status: raw

> category: informative

Reviewer: If this document actually specifies Glacier, it should be `Standards Track`.
An alternative would be introducing two documents. The `Informational` could cover things that alternatively could be part of a scientifc paper ([see my comment](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc/pull/512#issuecomment-1219518824)), while the `Standards Track` contains the actual specification.

> tags: logos/consensus,implementation/rust, implementation/python, implementation/common-lisp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: logos/consensus
```

I'd remove implementation related tags.
The tags were introduced in #368 

The idea was to have a specified list of tags. We could have an RFC listing tags...
Alternatively, we could introduce tags in a more dynamic less structured manner.
I'll start a discussion on that (meeting and/or discord). Feel free to comment here, too :).

editor: Mark Evenson <mark.evenson@status.im>
created: 01-JUL-2022
revised: <2022-08-19 Fri 10:35>
uri: <https://rdf.logos.co/protocol/glacier/1/0/0#<2022-08-19%20Fri$2009:40Z>
contributors:
    - Álvaro Castro-Castilla 
---

# Abstract

This document specifies Glacier: a Byzantine tolerant binary decision

> agreement algorithm.  Glacier is a novel member of the Snow family

Reviewer 6: I'd suggest we add "in that it is a probabalistic leaderless BFT consensus algorithm that leverages mestability via network subsampling"

that utilizes bounded memory for its execution.  We present an

> application context of the use of Glacier in a more efficient,

Reviewer 6: a more -> an

leaderless, probabilitisic permission-less consensus mechanism.  We
outline a simple taxonomy of Byzantine adversaries, leaving explicit
explorations of to subsequent publication.

# One Possible Logos Manifesto

Logos seeks to develop components for a composable infrastructure for
any Network State.  One of these components is the ability to come to
consensus on a given proposal.  We need to replace resource intensive
Nakomoto consensus mechanisms with those which belong to the class of

> more efficient ones rooted in leaderless decentralization.  By

Reviewer 6: I'd like a note on the fact that they are also less constrained than PoW and thus, more adaptive to a network's requirements.

documenting Glacier, a component for shared consenus composable with

> models of the finalization of shared data structure, Logos starts the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
models of the finalization of shared data structures, Logos starts the
```

construction of a "value-free" Network State infrastucture.

> Subsequently, we will connect the implementation of Glacier to an the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subsequently, we will connect the implementation of Glacier to an
```

> appopiately secure execution of a explicitly desired security model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
appropriately secure execution of a explicitly desired security model.
```

> As a member of the Snow family, Glacier provides an tractably

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a member of the Snow family, Glacier provides a tractably
```

computable probabilistic measure of safety of the
finalization of states of shared data structures.

> We start with simple two-level composition model for the practical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We start with a simple two-level composition model for the practical
```

execution of such a fairly distributed consensus mechanism, in which
an underlying leaderless binary decision mechanism votes on the
finalization of nodes distributed, directed, acyclic graph.  Here, we

> present a pseudo-code specification the Glacier algorithm which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
present a pseudo-code specification of the Glacier algorithm which
```

> finalization of nodes distributed, directed, acyclic graph.  Here, we

Reviewer: [...] votes on the finalization of nodes distributed, directed, acyclic graph. 

I am not sure how attributes and nouns relate here.
Maybe "nodes distributed in a directed, acyclic graph"?

provides a Byzantine fault tolerant implementation of the base binary

> decision mechanism.  We start to outline a taxonomy of Byzantine adversaries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decision mechanism. We start to outline a taxonomy of Byzantine adversaries
```

that seek to thwart this computation's correct honesty, to which
subsequent results need to be annotated.

The algorithim we specify here, Glacier, may be extended to a DAG

> structure in order to achieve a leaderless byzantine fault tolerancr.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
structure in order to achieve a leaderless byzantine fault tolerance.
```

## Leaderless Consensus Model Application to Shared State 

Given an underlying binary consensus mechanism, one may quickly vote

> on the distributed, directed acyclic ledger graph of transactions.  If

Reviewer 6: no need to focus on what type of data we are coming to consensus on. An algorithm like this doesn't care.

solicits other node's opinion in query rounds.  Given a set of `n`
leaderless computational nodes, a gossip-based protocol is presumed to
exist which allows members to discover, join, and leave a weakly
transitory maximally connected graph.  Joining this graph allows each
node to view a possibly incomplete node membership list of all other
nodes.  This view may change as the protocol advances, as nodes join
and leave.

### Proposal Identification

The node has a semantics and serialization of the proposal, of which
it sets an initial opinion:

     opinion
        <-- initial opinion on truth of the proposal
            as one of: {NO, NONE, YES}
    
The proposal proceeds in asynchronous rounds, in which each node
queries `k` randomly sampled nodes for their opinions until a decision
about local finality is achieved.  The liveness of the algorithm is
severely constrained in the absence of timeouts for a round to
proceed.  When a given node has finalized its decision on the
proposal, it enters a quiescent state in which it optionally discards
all information gathered during the query process retaining only the
final opinion on the truth of the proposal.

> ### Setup Parameters

Reviewer 6: I would definitely like a more formal definition of the variables involved, and a given greek identifier so we can write formulas and reference them more easily.

Author: @corpetty I could use a little more instruction on how to revise: 

1.  A Greek identifier for each constant/parameter assigination?  LaTeX is still a little wonky, so I just did all the actual algorithm in straight Markdown.  I would use UTF-8 glyphs at the moment for this labeling.

2.  By "formal" do you mean some sort of type specification?  I eliminated the use of floats on purpose, so that currently all one needs is positive integer ratios.  We could put an upper limit on the size of the integers, but I don't have justification for this other than "what would reasonably fit" efficiently on contemporary architectures.

Reviewer 2: On page 7 of  https://www.overleaf.com/read/vrqshkdxkfxz I have written mathematical description of the Glacier algorithm  and perhaps some of the notation introduced  can be also used in this document.

The node initializes the following integer ratios as constants:
```
;;; The following values are constants chosen with justification from experiments
;;; performed with the adversarial models

;; FIXME: find and justify an empirical confidence threshold 
confidence_threshold

>   <-- 1  ;; BOGUS:  this should be a function of the network size

Reviewer 6: a confidence of 1 means that we have infinite evidence in a given direction, and thus, full confidence in a given decision.

Reviewer 2: Suppose that at time $t=0$ \emph{all}  $N$ nodes in the network  are  in state Yes (or No), and there are no adversaries,  then  each node in the  \emph{Glacier} will stop updating after $\frac{\ell c}{K(1-c)}$ iterations, where $c\in(0,1)$ is the confidence  threshold, $\ell$ is the look-ahead parameter  and $K$ is  the query size. So $c$ has to be strictly less that $1$, otherwise number of iterations will diverge as $c$ approaches $1$.

         ;; and the current confidence in the observer majority as 
         ;; a function of the current round.  With a value of `1`
         ;; the algorithim will never terminate

;;; constant look ahead for number of rounds we expect to finalize a
;;; decision.  Could be set dependent on number of nodes 
;;; visible in the current gossip graph.

> look_ahead 

Reviewer: Does this convey any information beyond the number of expected rounds to finalize?
If not, why not call it something like `num_expected_rounds`?

Author: Strictly speaking, `look_ahead` is directly porportional to number of rounds, and is not exactly the magnitude of rounds.  Renaming makes sense.  The term was Alavaro's original.

Reviewer: The term was confusing to me in that context because you can't actually look ahead like you can in regexes.

In which way is it directly porportional to the number of rounds?

Author: `look_ahead` is used to compute a `confidence` value:
```
    confidence 
      <-- total_votes / (total_votes + look_ahead) 
```
which is directly proportional `evidence` and `alpha` parameters used in the DECISION phase:
```
    evidence 
      <-- new_evidence * ( 1 - confidence ) + total_evidence * confidence 
    alpha 
      <-- doubt * ( 1 - confidence ) + certainty * confidence 
```

Thus, in rounds where `total_votes` << `look_ahead`, Glacier does not put much faith in what it learns from the queries.

Reviewer: Yes, this is how `look_ahead` is used. But, in which way is the value of `look_ahead` itself proportional to the number of rounds?
Is there another factor besides being the expected number of rounds?

If it is just the expected number of rounds, I'd rename that variable to `num_expected_rounds`.
Imo, the following statement would be easier to grasp, too, if `look_ahead` would be replaced with `num_expected_rounds`:

> Thus, in rounds where total_votes << look_ahead, Glacier does not put much faith in what it learns from the queries.

Any other opinions here? Is `look_ahead` established terminology for this?

  <-- 19
;;; These need to be justified empirically via modeling and simulation.
certainty ;; the confidence weighting parameter (aka alpha_1)
  <-- 4 / 5  
doubt ;; the lack of confidence weighting parameter (aka alpha_2)
  <-- 2 / 5 

k_multiplier     ;; neighbor threshold multiplier
  <-- 2

;;; maximal threshold multiplier, i.e. we will never exceed 
;;; questioning k_initial * k_multiplier ^ max_k_multiplier peers

> max_k_multiplier 

Reviewer: This naming is confusing (at least for me it was when I read the formula using it below)

The actual max multiplier is ` k_multiplier ^ max_k_multiplier`

I'd either

* call this variable  `max_k_multiplier_power`, or
* set `max_k_multiplier = k_multiplier ^ 4`

(evolving) semantics and syntax of the "on the wire" representation of
this query.

When the query finishes, the node now initializes the following two
values:

    new_votes 
      <-- |total vote replies received in this round to the current query|
    positive_votes 
      <-- |YES votes received from the query| 
    
### Computation

The node runs the `new_votes` and `positive_votes` parameters received
in the query round through the following algorithm:

    total_votes 
      +== new_votes
    total_positive 
      +== positive_votes
    confidence 
      <-- total_votes / (total_votes + look_ahead) 
    total_evidence 
      <-- total_positive / total_votes
    new_evidence 
      <-- positive_votes / new_votes
    evidence 
      <-- new_evidence * ( 1 - confidence ) + total_evidence * confidence 
    alpha 
      <-- doubt * ( 1 - confidence ) + certainty * confidence 
    
### Opinion 

The node updates its local opinion on the consensus proposal by
examining the relationship between the evidence accumulated for a
proposal with the confidence encoded in the `alpha` parameter:

    IF
      evidence > alpha

>     THEN ;; The node adopts the opinion YES on the proposal

Reviewer: Imo, the comments, e.g. `;; The node adopts the opinion YES on the proposal`, make this part harder to read.
The pseudo code in itself is obvious. I'd remove these comments.

      opinion <-- YES
    ELSE IF       
      evidence < 1 - alpha
    THEN ;; The node adopts the opinion NO on the proposal 
      opinion <-- NO

>        

Reviewer: I'd make the else case explicit here and add

```
      ELSE 
￼           opinion <-- NONE
```

Author: Hmm.  Glacier never sets its `opinion` to `NONE` in this round, this is only possibly done in the initialization step.  If after checking the `confidence` and `alpha` relationship and if the opinion is `NONE`, Glacier widens its search by increasing the number of nodes it queries in the next round.

Perhaps I need to approach this section differently to make that more clear?

Reviewer: In this case, I'd just add a clause saying that if none of the conditional branches are hit, the opinion is/stays NONE.

When I read this

> If the opinion of the node is `NONE` after evaluating the relation between `evidence` and `alpha`

I assumed, option is NONE in the default case, but it would be easier to grasp if that would be explicit.

If the opinion of the node is `NONE` after evaluating the relation
between `evidence` and `alpha`, adjust the number of uniform randomly
queried nodes by multiplying the neighbors `k` by the `k_multiplier`
up to the limit of `k_max_multiplier` query size increases.
    
    ;; possibly increase number nodes to uniformly randomly query in next round
    WHEN
         opinion is NONE
      AND 
         k < k_original * k_multiplier ^ max_k_multiplier
    THEN 
       k <-- k * k_multiplier

###  Decision 

After the OPINION phase is executed, the current value of `confidence`
is considered: if `confidence` exceeds a threshold derived from the
network size and directly related to the total votes received, an
honest node marks the decision as final, and always returns this

> opinion is response to further queries from other nodes on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
opinion as a response to further queries from other nodes on the
```

Reviewer: (Just marking this as still in there during my current review.)

network.
 
    IF 
      confidence > confidence_threshold
    OR 
      round > max_rounds
    THEN
      finalized <-- T
      QUERY LOOP TERMINATES
    ELSE 
      round +== 1

>       GOTO QUERY 

Reviewer: Where is QUERY? If it is not explicitly defined somewhere, I'd rather say `QUERY LOOP CONTINUES`,
matching the previous phrasing of `QUERY LOOP TERMINATES`

Reviewer: (Just saw, the section is called query. I'd still go with the suggestion in my previous comment as `QUERY` is not defined as label in the code.)

Thus, after the decision phase, either a decision has been finalized
and the local node becomes quiescent never initiating a new query, or
it initiates a [new query](#query).

### Termination

The algorithm terminates under the following execution model considerations:

> A local round of Glacier terminates in one of three conditions:

Reviewer: I'd merge these sentences.

1.  No queries are received for any newly initiated round for temporal

>     periods observed via a locally computed passage of time.

Reviewer: Are there any constraints on the accuracy of calculating said period?

Reviewer: (I'd assume, if a node happened to have "a clock whose seconds go faster", this node would be considered byzantine.)

Author: There is a section on the notion of "local clock" below which I have referenced.  

For Glacier nodes who are accelerating at appreciable relativistic velocities, they will definitely have trouble participating in consensus as they essentially never initiate queries.  For nodes that have "a clock whose seconds go faster", I think the basics of the algorithm hold ok.  Need to think a bit if there is a simpler way to specify this.

2.  The confidence on the proposal exceeds our threshold for
    finalization.
    

> 3.  The number of `rounds` executed would be greater than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  The number of `rounds` executed is greater than
```

(It is a definitive termination condition.)

    `max_rounds`. 
    
#### Quiescence

After a local node has finalized an opinion, it enters a quiescent
state whereby it never solicits new votes on the proposal.  The local
node MUST reply with the currently finalized majority opinion.

#### Clock

The algorithim only requires that nodes have computed the drift of
observation of the passage of local time, not that that they have
coordinated an absolute time with their peers.  For an implementation

> of a phase locked-loop feedback to measure local clock drift see [ntp][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of a phase locked-loop feedback to measure local clock drift see [NTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5905.html).
```

## Further points
    
#### Modeling 

[[ TODO map to sync/async arguments ]]

### Node receives information during round

In the query step, the node is envisioned as packing information into

> the query to cut down on the communication overhead a query to each of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the query to cut down on the communication overhead of a query to each of
```

Reviewer: (bump)

> this `k` nodes containing the node's own current opinion on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
these `k` nodes containing the node's own current opinion on the
```

Reviewer: (bump)
Also, the information might be easier to parse if this sentence was split.

proposal ("YES", "NO", or "NONE").  The relation of the metadata

> is not currently analyzed to these opinions should be constrained.

Reviewer: Not sure what is meant here.

Reviewer 6: agreed, oddly worded sentence.

### Weighted Node values

The view of network peers participants may optionally have a weighting
assigned for each node consisting of a real on the interval inclusive
of `0` but exclusive of `1`.  This weight is used in each query round
when selecting the `k` peers so the probability of selecting nodes is
proportional to their weight.

Node weighting probablity
$$
P(i) = \frac{w_i}{\sum_{j=0}^{j=N} w_j}
$$ 

where `w_i` is the weight of the `i`th peer.

> This weighted value would be used to reflect decisions mediating

Reviewer 6: maybe rephrase to something like:

"A given nodes weight can be calcualated in a multitude of ways and is left as an implementation detail or further modification. Such a weight could be derived from a multitude of values including:"

- Staking
- Heuristic reputation
- Manual reputation

#### Problems with Weighting Node Value of Opinions

If the view of other nodes is incomplete, then the sum of the optional
weighting won't be a probability distribution normalized to 1.

The current algorithm doesn't describe how the initial opinions are formed.

# Implementation status

> 

Reviewer: Just as a note: Imo, this is section should be removed once the RFC advances to stable.
In a raw draft, it is helpful info.

logos.co prepares to share an implementations in Rust which contains
an efficiently multi-threaded implementation utilized by both a local
simulator and actual network construction.  Expressions of Glacier in
Python and Common Lisp are also in limited public review.

> # Interoperability

Reviewer: I'd call this section wire protocol, to make the purpose of this section explicit (see template).
Imo, it is fine, if the raw RFC does not specify the full wire protocol yet; but the future goal is for this section to specify the wire protocol.

Reviewer: (The wire protocol section may contain a concise semantics description, as the one you list below. This is very helpful :))

    :_0 [ rdfs:label "round";
          rdfs:comment """
The current round of this query 

This starts with zero.
""" ;
          a xsd:postitiveInteger; ],
    :_1 [ rdfs:label "uri";
          rdfs:comment """
A unique URI for the proposal.

It should be possible to examine the proposal by resolving this resource.
""" ;
          a xsd:anyURI ],
    :_2 [ rdfs:label "opinion";
          rdfs:comment """
The opinion on the proposal

One of the strings "YES" "NO" or "NONE".
""" ;
          # TODO constrain as an enumeration on three values efficiently
          a xsd:string ] 
    ) .
```

Nodes are advised to use Waku messages to include their own
metadata in serializations as needed.  

## Syntax

The semantic description presented above can be reliably round-tripped
through a suitable serialization mechanism.  JSON-LD provides a
canonical mapping to UTF-8 JSON.

The message exchanged are a simple enumeration of three values is not
currently analyzed reflecting the opinion on the given proposal:

    { NO, NONE, YES }

When represented via integers, such as choosing 
 
     { -1, 0, +1 }

the parity summations across network invariants often become easier to
manipulate.

> 

Reviewer 6: @kaiserd do you currently have a place for experimental results and analysis for a given specification? We have quite a bit of work here, but not sure how or where to add it to the specification. 

I'd previously thought it would be useful to add an additional level of specification after stable like "vetted" or "verified" or something that helps give confidence to the level of confirmation analysis for a given specification.

Reviewer: @corpetty 

> @kaiserd do you currently have a place for experimental results and analysis for a given specification? We have quite a bit of work here, but not sure how or where to add it to the specification.

For now, I'd put such results in the appendix.
For future versions (draft, stable), results and analyses might be published in papers, which can be cited in the RFC.

> I'd previously thought it would be useful to add an additional level of specification after stable like "vetted" or "verified" or something that helps give confidence to the level of confirmation analysis for a given specification.

We could introduce a state.
Alternatively, we could introduce "verified" as a tag.

My suggestion would be to only promote RFCs to `stable` if they are already "verified";
either formally or at least by the interoperability of independent implementations.
This is what the IETF does. IETF, proposals can be in draft state for a long time.
TLS 1.3, for example, had 28 draft versions (over 4 years) before being promoted to a stable RFC.
Imo, this level of stability is expected by implementers when seeing a `stable` spec.

I'll open a discussion issue for this :)

> # Sovereignty Considerations

Reviewer: I'd still call this `Security Considerations` to be consistent with other RFCs. 
Wdyt?

## Privacy

In practice, each honest node gossips its current opinion which
reduces the number of messages that need to be gossiped for a given

> proposal.  The resulting impact on the privacy of the node's opinion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proposal. The resulting impact on the privacy of the node's opinion
```

is not currently analyzed.

## Security with respect to various Adversarial Models 

> Adversarial models have been tested for which the values for current

Reviewer: A reference to these tests would be good.

parameters of Glacier have been tuned.  Exposition of the
justification of this tuning need to be completed.

### Local Strategies

#### Random Adversaries

A random adversary optionally chooses to respond to all queries with a
random decision.  Note that this adversary may be in some sense
Byzantine but not malicious.  The random adversary also models some
software defects involved in not "understanding" how to derive a truth
value for a given proposition.

#### Infantile Adversary

Like a petulant child, an infantile adversary responds with the
opposite vote of the honest majority on an opinion.

> 

Reviewer: How does Glacier deal with this attacker?

### Omniscient Adversaries

Omniscient adversaries have somhow gained an "unfair" participation in
consensus by being able to control `f` of `N` nodes with a out-of-band
"supra-liminal" coordination mechansim.  Such adversaries use this
coordinated behavior to delay or sway honest majority consensus.

> 

Reviewer: What are the effects? Is Glacier safe in this model?

#### Passive Gossip Adversary

The passive network omniscient adversary is fully aware at all times
of the network state. Such an adversary can always chose to vote in
the most efficient way to block the distributed consenus from
finalizing.

> 

Reviewer: Is Glacier safe in this model?

#### Active Gossip Adversary

An omniscient gossip adversary somehow not only controls `f` of `N`
nodes, but has also has corrupted communications between nodes such
that she may inspect, delay, and drop arbitrary messages.  Such an
adversary uses capability to corrupt consensus away from honest
decisions to ones favorable to itself.  This adversary will, of
course, choose to participate in an honest manner until defecting is
most advantageous.

> 

Reviewer: Is Glacier safe in this model?

# Future Directions

Although we have proposed a normative description of the
implementation of the underlying binary consensus algorithm (Glacier),
we believe we have analyzed its adversarial performance in a manner
that is ammendable to replacement by another member of the [snow*](#snow*)
family.

We have presumed the existence of a general family of algorithms that
can be counted on to vote on nodes in the DAG in a fair manner.
Avalanche provides an example of the construction of votes on UTXO
transactions.  One can express all state machine, i.e. account-based
models as checkpoints anchored in UTXO trust, so we believe that this
presupposition has some justification.  We can envision a need for
tooling abstraction that allow one to just program the DAG itself, as
they should be of stable interest no matter if Glacier isn't. 

# Informative References

0. [Logos](<https://logos.co/>)

1. [On BFT Consensus Evolution: From Monolithic to
   DAG](<https://dahliamalkhi.github.io/posts/2022/06/dag-bft/>)

2. [snow-ipfs](<https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmUy4jh5mGNZvLkjies1RWM4YuvJh5o2FYopNPVYwrRVGV>)

> 3. [snow*](<https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08936v2>) Rocket Team, Maofan

Reviewer 6: it is reasonable to point to the Ava Labs whitepapers here, as they are the most up to date versions of the papers. https://www.avalabs.org/whitepapers

   Yin, Kevin Sekniqi, Robbert van Renesse, and Emin Gün Sirer. 
   “Scalable and Probabilistic Leaderless BFT Consensus through
   Metastability.” arXiv, August 24, 2020.
   
4. [Move](<https://cloud.google.com/composer/docs/how-to/using/writing-dags>)
    Move: a Language for Writing DAG Abstractions 

5. [rdf](<http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>)

6. [rdfs](<http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>)

7. [xsd](<http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#>) 

8. [n3-w3c-notes](<https://www.w3.org/TeamSubmission/n3/>)

9. [ntp](<https://www.ntp.org/downloads.html>)

## Normative Refenences

0. [glacier](<https://rdf.logos.co/protocol/glacier/1/0/0/raw>)

1. [n3](<https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Notation3.html>)

2. [json-ld](<https://json-ld.org/>)

# Appendix A: Alvaro's Exposition of Glacier

> In this appendix, we present Alvaro's original notion of Glacier,

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure we need to include this.

Reviewer: Maybe remove this appendix and add a link in the introductory sections of this spec?

total_positive 
   <-- 0
;; the current query round, an integer starting from zero
round
  <-- 0
```

###  Query 

A node selects `k` nodes randomly from the current locally known
complete set of peers in the network.

A query is sent to each neighbor with the node's current `opinion` of
the proposal.

Each node replies with their current opinion on the proposal.

See [the wire protocol Interoperability section](#wire-protocol) for
details on the semantics and syntax of the "on the wire"
representation of this query.

When the query finishes, the node now initializes the following two
values:

    new_votes 
      <-- |total vote replies received in this round to the current query|
    positive_votes 
      <-- |YES votes received from the query| 
    
### Computation

The node runs the `new_votes` and `positive_votes` parameters received
in the query round through the following algorithm:

    total_votes 
      +== new_votes
    total_positive 
      +== positive_votes
    confidence 
      <-- total_votes / (total_votes + look_ahead) 
    total_evidence 
      <-- total_positive / total_votes
    new_evidence 

>       <-- positive_votes / new_votes

Reviewer 2: Suppose that a node queried $K$ nodes but  all  $K$  haven't  responded.  In this case   positive_votes=0 and  new_votes=0 and we will get 0/0 division, i.e. new_evidence is undefined. Intuitively when we have no responses we have no evidence, but we need to decide on have to handle this situation.

Reviewer 5: In the implementation we just compute things if we at least 1 vote. https://github.com/logos-co/consensus-research/blob/101cf169e4665e6720ce6ee3c5bc582337b73cd1/consensus/claro/src/claro.rs#L248
